An Unknown Benefactor from Chennai

The concept of fund-raising is extremely popular in the USA. There are separate departments in universities and charitable organizations for this activity. They catch the right fish by different methods so that donors give money to the organization or university concerned. This notion is now catching on in India too.
My friend Mythili works for an NGO. She is a fund-raiser, smart and talkative, hailing from a middle-class family. One morning, she called up asking me to accompany her to the house of a very affluent person, a lady who was well known in the city. Mythili had been approaching this woman for a donation. At last, the lady had agreed to meet Mythili in her farmhouse forty kilometres away from the city. Mythili was a little hesitant to go alone and so she asked me to accompany her.
We reached the palatial house. It was built on a huge twenty-five acre plot and was surrounded by a beautiful garden. The house was built in the traditional cottage model. There was strict security and we were asked a number of questions. Only after confirming our appointment over the intercom did the guard let us in.
Though it had a rustic look from the outside, the house was gorgeous and modern inside. All the walls were painted in pastel shades. There was a pond with a fountain sprinkling scented water. It seemed to bring nature into that big hall. The wooden floor and antique objects added to the charm. There was also a terrace garden.
The lady of the house was sitting on a swing hung by shining chains. She
 
looked gorgeous in a chiffon sari and platinum ornaments. From a distance, she made a gesture telling us to sit down. Though in her mid-fifties, she looked much younger. There was the aroma of sandalwood all around. Fresh flowers were kept in vases. Two smart-looking secretaries were next to her. Both Mythili and I felt very uncomfortable because the most important things in life—the smile and warmth—were missing here. I have always observed that it is not the food, nor the ornaments, nor the house, but a host’s genuine warmth that puts guests at ease and opens the gateway to friendship, irrespective of status, age, gender and language.
Mythili talked about her NGO, of course everything in superlative terms as befitted her mission. Ultimately, she has to sell her ideas. The lady listened patiently, not showing any reaction. When people don’t show any reaction, the person on the other side of the table often becomes tongue-tied. Shrewd people never allow anyone to read their mind. Simple-minded people talk a lot, open their heart and reveal what they are, which is exactly what Mythili did. The other lady revealed nothing at all.
After an unbearable silence, she said, ‘Give your papers to my secretary. I will go through them and get back to you.’
Our balloon of enthusiasm was pricked by that answer. After all, she could have said this over the phone. We drove back all the way, having wasted half a day’s work.
I met Mythili a month later at a school opening ceremony where the same would-be donor was the chief guest. I asked Mythili about the donation.
Mythili took me aside and told me in hushed tones, ‘It’s very difficult to get money out of her. She is ready to spend any amount of money on herself, but she thinks ten thousand times before giving to a charity. You know, after I wooed her for a month she finally agreed to give Rs 10,000 on the condition that we invite her for this function as the chief guest, put her photo in the paper and give a press release about her.’
‘You shouldn’t have asked her for such a small amount.’
‘Please remember that raising funds for an NGO is very difficult. You don’t have the same experience. Every rupee counts. Is it not true that every drop of water makes an ocean? Nobody donates money without expecting something in return. This is the lesson I’ve learnt in fund-raising.’
Since I had no experience in fund-raising, I had to accept what Mythili said.
 
Some time later I returned to work after having been on leave for a week. I dreaded coming back to my office because of the number of letters and emails that would have piled up while I was away. I was busy sorting out letters when my secretary took out a small envelope. There was an expression of surprise on her face.
‘What is so surprising in that envelope?’
She showed me a small handwritten note. It said, ‘I know that you do not know me. I read about your work in the newspapers. I read your articles as well. When a writer really experiences life, only then can he or she write about it.
Language is just a tool but in no way can good language alone make a readable article. It is the personal experience along with suitable language that makes an article interesting to read. By reading your experiences, I have realized what kind of work you do and how passionately you do it …’
I was busy so I handed the note back to my secretary and said impatiently, ‘This is just one of those exaggerated letters of appreciation. Just file it. You don’t need to show me such things. Morning time is very precious in the office.’
‘Ma’am, did you read it completely? This is something different.’
I took the note back and continued reading. ‘I am old and cannot travel like you. I have saved some money. I would like to give it to you so that you can use it in your work. You may have much more, but this is my contribution to your work. I will not ask to whom you give it or how you use it. I have confidence in you.’
A draft for Rs 4,00,000 was attached to the note.
Now I was even more surprised than my secretary. In my public life, I have received hundreds of applications asking for money and many letters telling me that the money I have donated is insufficient. But here was a person spontaneously giving me money for my work. There was not a single demand. I held up the draft. It was like a star shining in the dark blue sky.
I asked my secretary whether she knew the person who had written the note and donated such a large sum, but she did not. The donor had neither written anything about himself nor given any contact details. From the postmark we knew that the letter was from Chennai.
I bow to this unknown donor from Chennai with great respect. I remembered the poem about Abu Ben Adam and prayed, ‘May his tribe increase.’
 
My mind went back to the rich lady whom Mythili had approached. How different the two donors were!
